# COVID risk evaluation
### Canadian individual COVID risk evaluation model with self-isolation probability prediction
### Executive Summary
The Public Health Agency of Canada analyzed COVID-19 behaviour data collected by the Insitute of Global Health Innovation Imperial College London. The purpose was to identify a subset of questions from the data to be made available to Canadians through an online questionnaire which would inform Canadians whether they are suspected COVID positive/negative (refered as “Model 1”) and to determine, internally, whether they are willing to self-isolate (refered as “Model 2”). This will help Canadians who lack access to COVID-19 tests to identify their risk level and will help the Public Health Agency of Canada educate unwilling self-isolators through developing educational advertissment camapigns on good COVID-19 behaviour and the importance of self-isolating. The K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) model was used on the identified subset of questions to assess whether these predictions were possible.
The overall Model 1 accuracy and precision for predicting whether an individual is COVID positive is 85% and 68%, respectively, however, the recall for predicting truly COVID positive cases is 7% which is rather low. Usage of solely Model 1 for identifying whether an individual is COVID positive or not is not advised.
The overall Model 2 accuracy and precision (optimized for the highest precision on a training set by K=2 for predicting whether an individual is willing to self-isolate is 64% and 59%, respectively. However, the recall for predicting the people unwilling to self-isolate is around 31%, which suggests that the model is prone to the Type II errors. But, assuming that precision is more important in identifying the people unwilling to quarantine, the model could significantly assist the decision making of the Public Health Agency.
### Introduction
The Institute of Global Health Innovation Imperial College London has collected COVID-19 behaviour data which is being analyzed by The Public Health Angency of Canada. This dataset contains information that was collected between the end of March until the middle of August 2020 during individual interviews. Interviewees were asked a series of questions regarding their symptoms, testing, isolation, social distancing, and other COVID-19 related behaviours. The original dataset included interview data from 29 countries, however, for the purpose of this analysis a subset of collected data was used and only included interviews from Canada and the United States.
The purpose of the Public Health Agency of Canada’s analysis of this data is two-fold: predict whether an individual is COVID positive/negative (Model 1) and whether they are willing to self-isolate (Model 2). This will be achieved by identifying a subset of questions from the interview data collected and packaging these questions in an online questionnaire which will be made available to Canadians. The intent of the questionnaire is to inform individuals who do not have access to COVID tests whether they are suspected to be COVID positive/negative which will be shown to the individual after the questionnaire is completed. The prediction of whether an individual is willing to self-isolate based on their answers to the questionnaire will be used internally to develop advertissment campaigns to educate specific types of behaviour that can help inform Canadians why self-isolating is important and identify whether certain types of behavior are indicators of whether someone is unwilling to self-isolate.
This report will begin by explaining how the data was prepared for the analysis performed. Then exploratory data analysis will be presented, justifying how certain model predictors were selected, followed by the performance of the K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) model on the dataset. This will be shown for two models, one to predict whether an individual is COVID positive/negative and a second to predict whether the individual is willing to self-isolate.
### Data Cleaning
#### Raw Dataset Overview
The raw dataset has 79 columns and 28,825 rows. Before cleaning, we have six integer columns, one float column, and 72 categorical columns. Among the six integer columns, one of them is an index column that ranges from 0 to 28,824. Among the categorical columns, there is one data and time column which is not well structured, and two should be numerical columns that are categorical due to inaccuracy errors.
#### Handling Data Incompleteness Error
After inspection, we have discovered missing values in the following columns:
'i3_health', 'i4_health', 'i5_health_1', 'i5_health_2', 'i5_health_3', 'i5_health_4', 'i5_health_5', 'i5_health_99', 'i5a_health', 'i6_health', 'i7b_health', 'i8_health', 'i9_health', 'i10_health', 'i11_health', 'i12_health_9', 'i12_health_10', 'i14_health_1', 'i14_health_2', 'i14_health_3', 'i14_health_4', 'i14_health_5', 'i14_health_6', 'i14_health_7', 'i14_health_8', 'i14_health_9', 'i14_health_10', 'i14_health_96', 'i14_health_98', 'i14_health_99', 'i14_health_other' ,'d1_health_1', 'd1_health_2', 'd1_health_3', 'd1_health_4', 'd1_health_5', 'd1_health_6', 'd1_health_7', 'd1_health_8', 'd1_health_9', 'd1_health_10', 'd1_health_11', 'd1_health_12', 'd1_health_13', 'd1_health_98', 'd1_health_99'
The majority of the missing values are represented by a space string, the rest are represented by “__NA__”. After inspecting the data key, we realized that most of these missing data are not caused by data gathering error but how the questionnaire is structured. For instance, i6_health asks the extent of someone’s self-isolation if they have developed the symptoms described in the previous questions. If the answerer does not have any symptoms, this field will be left blank. Because of this, we believe that we should not simply remove these columns to prevent a loss of important information, instead, for most of the fields that are not applicable, we replaced them with “Not_Applicable”.
It is worth mentioning that during the missing data handling process we have decided to drop the i14_health_other column since its information is completely unstructured and there are 92.42% of data missing.
#### Handling Inaccuracy Error
We have noticed that two of the numerical columns, “household_size” and “household_children” were of type string. This was caused by the string values that were present in the data. Here are the unique values in these two columns before cleaning:
